Hi there.
This is the Toledo.
Now, let's take a look at atomic variables, which were introduced in Java five.
The Java concurrency in practice refers to them as better volatile variables as they offer the same
memory.
Visibility guarantees as volatile variables, but at the same time they also support Atomic City like
locks.
However, with regards to Atomic City, they are constrained to only single variables.
That is, they cannot guard a block of code like the way synchronization does.
Since we are still discussing about memory visibility, this lecture is also related to Java memory
model.
So let's go ahead and see what atomic variables are.
And at the end, we will also do a short demo.
You may recall this example quote from our discussion on race condition here get new ID method is supposed
to return the next ID value, which should be unique.
Recall that ID here is a shared variable between threads, but there's the race condition here as the
increment operation is not atomic.
It involves three sub instructions as we can see here.
So here are two threads can be inside the get new ID method at the same time, and both may read the
same value and thus incrementing the value only once.
Terminology wise, such kind of a failure is referred to as safety failure.
Now here, declaring it as volatile is not going to help with a city.
Right.
We know that volatile can only guarantee memory, visibility.
We know that we can get at it by making get new ID method as synchronized method as we see here.
But the intention here is to perform a simple increment operation.
And synchronisation can be expensive just for doing that.
The main factor for being expensive is the cost incurred in suspension and resumption process when the
lock for the synchronised method is already acquired by some other thread.
So when lock is not available, Threat Scheduler would suspend the thread in context, which would mean
that the thread will be moved into BLOCK State and later it should be brought back into vulnerable state
before moving it back into running state.
So that's a pretty serious overhead just for doing a simple operation such as increment.
And it could be worse if there are several threads contending for the lock.
So it is the thread suspension and rescheduling that is proving to be costly.
Just acquiring and releasing a lock is not much of an issue.
So the solution is to use atomic variables.
The term atomic in atomic variable tells us that the variable has something to do with Atomic City.
Atomic variables are represented by atomic variable classes which are from the package Java dot dot,
concurrent dot atomic and the class of support atomic operations on single variables.
So here we replaced long with atomic long class, which is one of the several atomic classes and get
new ID method now invokes a method called increment and get on the ID variable, which is the increment
operation which involved three sub instructions is performed atomically.
So there is no race condition here.
So when multiple threads access the get new ID method, the increment and get method will ensure that
a unique value is always written.
Good thing about an atomic variable is that it has the same memory semantics as volatile variable and
at the same time it also has the Atomic City benefit of synchronization but without using locks.
That is, there is no overhead of threat, suspension and resumption.
So the atomic variable is safe internally.
Atomic long uses a volatile variable and hence it has the same memory visibility as volatile variable.
In fact, as mentioned earlier, atomic variables are regarded as better volatiles, as they also additionally
support atomic.
Compared to synchronization, atomic variables are fine grained and limit the scope to a single variable
like the ID in this example.
Synchronization, on the other hand, can make a block of code to work atomically.
Due to the way atomic variables are implemented.
They do not involve locks.
So atomic variables do not use locks and hence there is no threat, suspension and resumption.
And they do this by using an approach called compare and swap.
To understand it, let's just consider the actual source code of the increment and method itself, which
is invoked on the atomic variable.
Here we have an infinite loop and within the loop we are first switching the current value of the atomic
variable and we are storing it in the variable current.
We simply use that method for this, which is another method in the atomic long class.
We are done setting the variable next to current plus one and then we are invoking another method compare
set in the atomic long class.
And this method invokes a native method that works atomically and implements an instruction called Compare
and Swap.
See as Compare and Swap first compares the current value which we are passing here to the current value
and the atomic variable at that instance of time.
And if the values match, then it implies that the current value has not been updated by any other thread
since it was read by the current thread.
And so the current atomic variable value will be swapped with the value in the next variable.
So compare and set invocation here returns a true and the next value is returned by the method.
But if the current value passed here was different from the current value in the atomic variable, that
would imply that the current value in atomic variable was updated by some other threat since the time
it was read by this particular threat and due to that swap will not happen and compare and set would
return a false.
With that, the thread would loop again to see if the value can be updated in the next iteration.
So this way, let's keep trying until they're able to increment the value.
And this approach of retrying is much more efficient than the expensive threat, suspension and resumption
that we have with synchronization.
With synchronization, the thread is basically blocked and here there is no blocking.
And hence this kind of an algorithm is referred to as a non blocking algorithm, it's called as a non
blocking algorithm and the technique used here is also referred to as optimistic locking as here.
The value of next variable is computed first based on the optimistic assumption that no other thread
would have already set the same value.
Then the optimistic assumption is true.
The shared memory is updated with next value without locking.
If the assumption is false, the work is lost, but still there is no locking involved.
The traditional locking with synchronization is sometimes referred to as pessimistic locking, since
it is opposite to optimistic locking.
Atomic variables are specifically good for doing things like in this example where we generate unique
numbers.
So as we see the scope of atomic, it is a single variable and that is as fine grained as it can get.
And it also has the memory visibility semantics as volatile variables.
There are 12 atomic variable classes which are divided into four groups scalar arrays, field operators
and compound variables.
Here are the classes that fall under scalar.
We already discussed atomic long and other than atomic long.
We also have atomic integer, atomic boolean and atomic reference.
If at all we use any atomic variable classes.
Probably these scalar classes are the ones we may likely use.
Classes that fall under other groups are not commonly used and hence we will not be discussing it here.
But supplementary notes in the resources section will discuss them briefly.
Under arrays, we have atomic long array, atomic integer array and atomic reference array.
These classes wrap a corresponding array and help in updating array elements atomically.
Under field operators, we have atomic long field operator, atomic integer, field Updater and Atomic
Reference Field Updater.
And these are reflection based utility classes that wrap around corresponding volatile variables and
can perform atomic operations on them.
So they work on volatile variables.
One use case is that for a given shade variable, you would like it to be mostly used as a simple,
volatile variable, but occasionally you would want to perform some atomic operations on them.
For this using scalar atomic classes could be unnecessary.
So you can use this field updated classes only when atomic is required and for the rest of the time
the volatile field would be used as is.
Once again, check out the supplementary notes in the resources section for more details on this.
Finally, under compound variables, we have atomic marker reference and atomic stamp reference.
These classes are used if we want to couple together an object reference with either a boolean flag
or with an integer.
If it is a boolean flag, it would be atomic marker reference.
Otherwise it would be atomic stamp reference in case of integer.
Once again, please refer to the supplementary notes.
Note that both atomic long and Atomic Integer are subclasses of the class number, while the rest are
subclasses of object class.
So that's about atomic variable courses when appropriate, they give you the best of both volatile variables
and locking mechanism.
So the support lock free thread safe programming on single variables with the memory semantics of volatile
variables or synchronization.
Now let's head over to Eclipse to do a short demo of Atomic Integer.
Okay.
For this demo, I created this new class called Meetup Event Simulator in our concurrency package.
And here basically we are going to simulate a meetup event and meetup.com.
So you must have heard of meetup.com.
If not, it's a very popular social networking site and it helps in organizing local group meetings.
And there are such group meetings happening in lots and lots of towns and villages across across the
world.
And these meetups can be in different categories like technology, art, yoga, or any category that
you can think of.
So here we are going to just simulate a single meetup event.
And a meetup event normally has a name, the name of the meetup event and also the number of also the
attendees who are attending the meetup event.
And the attendees, the count of the attendees is captured by this variable count.
So this meetup event is basically a static nested class, a static member class, and here the name
variable captures the name of the meetup event.
And count is for capturing the number of people who are attending the event.
So we are using an atomic integer here and we are initializing it with one because the event itself
has an organizer and we would assume that he or she would be attending it.
So there is a constructor here to initialize the name and we have three methods.
One is attending, the other one is non attending, not attending.
And the third one is something called get count, which gives the the count of the number of attendees.
So in the attending method, if a particular user is going to attend, he or she would invoke this method
attending and the other user can bring along some number of guests.
So we have this parameter guest code, but if the parameter guest count is equal to one, it means that
only the user is going to attend and there are no other guests.
So if guest count is one, we are simply using invoking the increment and get on the count variable
and count variable.
As I said earlier, it is an atomic integer and increment and get.
We already discussed it in the lecture.
In the slides and if guest count is greater than one, then we are invoking another method called add
and get.
So the name is very obvious here.
It's going to add this guest count to the current value in count and would return that value.
So both of them would return an int value here because it is an atomic integer.
And now coming to not attending it does the exact opposite.
So if the user chooses to not attend, so initially he or she might have this to attend, but then later
they may want to withdraw their attendance, in which case they would invoke this method and pass the
guest count.
Also, initially, they must have they must have said that they are going to come with some number of
guests.
So when they are withdrawing, they also have to specify the same count, the guest count.
So if guest count is equal to one, we are invoking decrement on get here.
When in attending we were invoking increment and get and here it is decrement and get and f count guess
count is greater than one.
Then we are simply using this logic here.
So we have the updated field here and we are getting the current value count.
Don't get we already discussed this when in the in the lecture slides when we were discussing about
increment and get.
So we looked at the source code.
So this one is also pretty similar to that to the source code of increment.
And so here we are getting the current count and the new count which would be current count minus guest
count, right?
So current count is the current count of the number of attendees and we and here the user is invoking,
not attending.
So we need to subtract guest count.
So that's what we are doing here.
So that would be the new count and we are invoking the compare and set method and we are passing both
current count and the new count.
And we know that it uses the compare and swap approach to update the value and we know that it is also
lock free.
And get corn simply returns a current value of the count.
Now we have the main method here and we are instantiating meetup event and we are just naming it as
the Boston Java User Group.
Java user groups are very popular user groups, meetup groups across across the world.
So even your city might be having one Java user group and you should definitely join it.
So this is for Boston and we are calling this variable as Jack Jack Boston jog for Java User Group and
we are creating three threads user one, user two and user three.
And here we are instantiating rentable.
So this is the task and here we are saying this particular user is going to attend with three guests
for Guess it says four, but one of them is the user itself and here we are printing the name of the
thread and also the end, the current count value.
So we are invoking the get count method and we are doing the same thing for user two.
But here initially we are attending and then the user is withdrawing here.
So he's invoking the not attending and passing the same value.
Three.
And finally, the third user is simply attending passing the one, the value one.
So it would invoke the increment and get method and the not attending.
When we pass three, it's going to.
Invoke this logic here in not attending.
And.
And in this case, when we are in working, attending and we are passing the value three, it would
it would invoke the ad and get method, right.
So for user three, we are only passing one, in which case it would it would invoke increment and get.
So those are the three users and then we are also naming them and then we are starting user one and
then we are sleeping for 1/2.
Then in working, start on user to sleeping for 2 seconds and invoking user three and sleeping for another
2 seconds.
And finally, we are getting the final count.
So let me just go ahead and run this here.
The sleep method is here and within the sleep method we are actually sleeping that we are making the
threat to sleep set.
This is the output and we are done.
So initially there was one user for the organiser and then user one is adding four users, so it became
five, then user two is adding three, so it became eight.
But then user two is also withdrawing so it doesn't want to attend.
So it came back to five, so it added three and then it subtracted three and user three is not bringing
any gas, so we are just incrementing by one.
So the final attendance is six, so that's about it.
So that's the atomic integer.
Atomic Long is also very similar to that and you can also check out the other classes in the package
java dot dot com current atomic.
And you can also check out the supplementary nodes and this code will be available in the resources
section too.
Thank you and happy coding.